What's up, everybody? You're listening to another episode of Life in English.
I'm your host, Tony Kaizen. And in this episode,
I'm going to share a conversation I had with my friend Guilherme from Mogi das Cruzes, Brazil.
He recently joined the Life in English community.
So I got a chance to sit down and talk to him about how he managed to learn English by himself
In less than two years without leaving his home.
But also I talked to him about the mindset he had during that learning process
And also what motivated him to join the Life in English community.
So I really hope you guys enjoy this conversation.
Maybe you get some tips or tricks or ideas,
Or maybe you feel motivated to join the community as well.
And if you'd like more information about the Life in English community and how to join,
You can visit lifeinenglish.net/vip.
But we're not going to waste any more time, my friend.
Let's get right into this conversation.
Guilherme:
Can you hear me?
Tony Kaizen:
I can hear you perfectly. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Okay. This is the first time I'm speaking English.
Usually, I listen to English, not speak. So I'm nervous because of that.
Tony Kaizen:
I got you, man. It's totally normal, I think.
But it's hard to believe this is the very first time you're speaking English with another human being because you can actually speak.
So how have you learned to speak if you have no one to speak to?
Guilherme:
And I don't know. I really don't. Just speaking.
A long time ago, I saw a teacher, a Brazilian teacher and he is having Instagram, English, Black Friday.
He's teaching black English. I don't know if you call black English.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah, you can. Black English. Sure.
Guilherme:
He said, If you listen a lot of English or enough English, when you...
When you have to speak it's more easily. Because...
Tony Kaizen:
Easier. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Easier. Okay. Easier. It's easier because you're listening to a lot of English.
So I don't know if it's true or not, but I'm just speaking. I don't know if it's right or wrong.
But I... I don't have, I'm not nervous because of speaking or video or etc.
It's English. English. Speaking English. It's hard. Definitely.
Tony Kaizen:
Well, I also don't know if it's true, but it's clearly working, man.
If I'm the first person that you've spoken English with, but you can still,
You know, express yourself in a basic way, I imagine you understand what I'm saying.
So obviously it's working, man. It's working.
Whatever you're doing, shit. That's cool though.
Guilherme:
I understand you perfectly because before I was watching
Because I didn't know you produce content to YouTube or Instagram, I just follow you on TikTok.
So yesterday I saw a video of you... a video and you talk about the Life in English.
Okay, this is it. That's what I need. And I just click the link.
Hey, all this stuff, you know.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah, yeah.
Guilherme:
And I think this, I can pay for this. So I had one problem.
I didn't have a credit card. Credit card. Cartão de crédito. Credit card.
Tony Kaizen:
Credit card. Exactly.
Guilherme:
And I just made one. Because I thought, I need this. I need to speak.
I need to speak to other people speaking English. And I don't know why it's so barato.
I don't know say... How you say in English. Barato.
Tony Kaizen:
Cheap.
Guilherme:
I think it's cheap. Okay. And here we go, I'm enjoying the community.
It's so difficult to say this word. Community.
Tony Kaizen:
It is, man. Even for me. Community. It's challenging. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Community. And I... The podcast and I'm a big fan of podcasts.
I listen a lot of podcasts, a lot of podcasts and I say, okay, there's no grammar,
Basically. Just a grammar guide. And I, I like the...
This word is harder. Estrutura. Structure.
Tony Kaizen:
Structure. That was good, man. Structure.
Guilherme:
Structure of your curse. Curse, course.
Tony Kaizen:
Course.
Guilherme:
Curse is maldição. It's curse of dragon like Yu-Gi-Oh monster.
I like it and say, okay, this is perfect, is this perfect for me.
Tony Kaizen:
I think you did a great job of describing it, man. Like you,
Basically told me what you were doing before and now.
Because it sounds like up until this point you were just learning by yourself.
You've never taken any course or gone to like, an English school, have you?
Guilherme:
Nope. I just learned it for myself.
Tony Kaizen:
How long? How long have you been learning English?
Guilherme:
I'm thinking something like one and a half years, two years.
Something like that. Because I never, I never studied English, you know?
I never take a notebook and write. No, I just...
Watching videos, subtitled videos, and with subtitles in Portuguese.
And my strategy was there is a lot of movies I watched my whole life. Okay? You understand me?
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah!
Guilherme:
My whole life. So I know the dialogues. I know the words they're saying.
So I just watch in English with subtitles in English and association.
Oh, this is that. That is this. And how to say "decorrer do tempo"? Passar do tempo.
Tony Kaizen:
Overtime. Overtime.
Guilherme:
Overtime. Overtime I just, I just understand the words without subtitles.
Tony Kaizen:
Understood.
Guilherme:
Understood the word without subtitles. And just doing the same thing, the same thing every day.
Every day, watching, listening, and podcasts and the same thing, the same thing, the same thing.
And I learn how to understand, how I understand people talking. So that's it.
I never study grammar or something like that.
And Rapid podcast and YouTube videos and series, movies, etc. Basically.
Tony Kaizen:
And that last piece of the puzzle, man, that one missing thing,
It sounds like was the speaking part. Just having real people to talk to.
Guilherme:
Yeah. Something I notice... I think that's the word.
I notice is the English for lessons or in English schools, it's not the real English.
Definitely. So I... But back. The first time I tried to learn from English schools,
English lessons and notebooks, books and grammar and the to be verbs and etc..
And when I'm watching the movie in English but Portuguese subtitles, I didn't understand.
And I thought, this is not... This is on the book. In the book.
Tony Kaizen:
In the book.
Guilherme:
In the book is not the real English. I need real English. I need here, real English.
Then I started to what I say, what I said. Associations.
English, Portuguese, subtitles, the movies and series. And I learned how to understood.
Tony Kaizen:
How to understand.
Guilherme:
How to understand. The verbs, the verbs...
Tony Kaizen:
Higher tenses. Yeah. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Because I never studied grammar. So that's it, I think is it.
Tony Kaizen:
I mean, to me, it's impressive, man. You just said it yourself.
You never studied grammar, but you understand spoken English.
And this is the first time... It's still so crazy to me.
This is the first time you're speaking English to a real person and you can communicate and make yourself understood, man.
And it just sounds to me like I know you don't know for sure if what you're doing is the right way to do it
Or if you should be doing other things. But clearly, like I said, what you're doing is working man,
And you haven't spent years at a school or taking fancy courses or anything like that.
It's just talking and listening, right? It really is that simple sometimes.
Guilherme:
I don't know if I say all the time people on the Internet and say how to speak,
How to understand the native speakers. Just listen to native speakers.
Just listen to native speakers speaking. There's no secrets. There's no nothing.
There's no key it's just listen, listen, listen, listen, listen.
And you understand they speaking. Just works for me.
Tony Kaizen:
Hey, it works for me too, man. It works for me too, shit.
Guilherme:
It's just... So I don't know and like I said, I was watching your videos and I noticed it.
You is... You do the same things with Portuguese and Spanish. These two languages.
You listen and listen and don't know if you study grammar or something like that,
But you listen a lot of native speakers speaking. So I thought, okay, I'm in the right way.
Tony Kaizen:
Yep. Exactly, man. Exactly. That's the whole philosophy of Life in English,
To be honest with you, man, is just understanding that you can do a bunch of stuff.
Everyone watches videos or grammar lessons. Everybody tries the courses in the schools.
But the most effective thing is doing what you did the first time you had to learn a language, man.
Just speak to real people. Listen to real people all day, every day. And even if it's never perfect.
It's... It just gets really good over time because you're doing it all the time.
All the time, you know? That's it.
Guilherme:
Yeah. And it's like you learn your native language.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah.
Guilherme:
You listen and speak, listen a lot, and speak a little.
And more speak, speak, speak over the time. Right? I like the...
I don't like English traditional standards lessons. And it's not for me.
I think that's the why, that's why I never go to school or never study... liked study and English books.
It's I... It's not, how to say that?
That's expre... There's expression in Portuguese is "entra na minha cabeça".
Tony Kaizen:
Entra na minha cabeça?
Guilherme:
Yeah, it's expression is... It means you memorize that.
Tony Kaizen:
Ahh, okay.
Guilherme:
You... Entra na minha cabeça is you memorize. Okay? Books I don't memorize.
I see a word, two days I forgot. That's it.
Oh, I think it looks like rain. If I disappear, my internet follows off. Okay?
Tony Kaizen:
Oh yeah. I was trying to figure out what you mean 'rain'.
But now I get it. Because, yeah, once it starts raining, the connection sometimes is not so good.
Guilherme:
Yeah. I don't know if it's the same in U.S. Brazil, it's rain the internet is over.
Brazil, it's rain. Internet...
Tony Kaizen:
No more internet. Bye-bye internet.
Guilherme:
Yeah.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah, yeah.
Guilherme:
Bye-bye internet. I don't know if it's the same in U.S, but in Brazil...
Tony Kaizen:
I mean, maybe in some places, like where it's in rural areas like the country and stuff.
But nah, in most cities like here, when it rains, usually we're good.
If it's a bad storm, then maybe. But nah, usually we're good.
But I've had that experience, man, when I was in Brazil a couple of years ago,
Whenever it would rain, it was just... It was bad.
Guilherme:
You have been in Brazil?
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah, yeah. I went in 2019. I spent a couple of months there.
Guilherme:
Oh! Do you like it?
Tony Kaizen:
I love it, man. I can't wait to go back, to be honest with you.
I spent two months in Sao Paulo and like two weeks in Salvador.
Guilherme:
Oh Sao Paulo, it's closer to me, in the same state. I'm in the city of the state of Sao Paulo.
Tony Kaizen:
Mogi das Cruzes, right?
Guilherme:
Yeah. Yeah. Mogi das Cruzes. And it's... I love this place.
Mogi das Cruzes, not Brazil. My city, not my country. My country is...
I like Brazil, like people, but institutions. Instituições. Institutions?
Tony Kaizen:
Institutions, yeah.
Guilherme:
Institutions are so bad, man. So bad.
My wife and me we want to move to Canada, Toronto, or Vancouver.
Something like that. But I don't know. It's Canada, it seems like U.S but with public health care,
I don't know, something like that. But I like U.S.
I like U.S. But I don't like that there's no public health care.
You have SUS. It's you have... If you have cancer, can you treat?
And and there's, if you don't have money and if you have cancer, you're okay.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah.
Guilherme:
So if I have cancer in the future, I don't know. And that's why I prefer, I'd rather Canada.
Tony Kaizen:
I'd rather Canada. Yeah. I mean, that's a good reason, man.
Health care is extremely important, and we do a lot of things great in this country.
Health care is not one of them. That's for sure.
Oh we have, like, quality health care. It's just you have to pay,
You have to sell your mother just to get it. You know what I'm saying? So...
Guilherme:
Yeah. Yeah. I saw something like that in Reddit. Reddit it's very popular in U.S.
And Brazil no one knows Reddit. And so I saw a case of a woman who has Covid, I don't remember exactly.
But something simple in, something in Brazil is for free.
And in U.S. shipping a $400, $300, something like that it's okay.
But most of Brazilians that... I'll be honest with you,
A most of Brazilian want to move to the United States just for buy iPhones, just for this.
Because iPhone is so expensive in Brazil. Something like 15 mil reais is like...
Tony Kaizen:
Jesus Christ! 15 thousand reais?
Guilherme:
Yes, 15 thousand. It's like insane. It's insane.
So the people want to move to U.S to buy iPhone, Tesla, or something like that.
Just because that the the the safe, the security, the...
It's not the main goal. The main goal is buy iPhones. And...
Tony Kaizen:
Buy iPhones. Oh, shit. R$15,000, that's like $2,700.
That's fucking insane. That is insane.
Guilherme:
It's the.. Insane. And if you convert the real to dollar. That's insane.
Tony Kaizen:
That's what I'm saying. Yeah, man. It's crazy.
Guilherme:
In real, in reais it's more insane because the salário mínimo. The minimum...
Tony Kaizen:
The minimum wage.
Guilherme:
Minimum wage is, I don't know, R$1,000.
Tony Kaizen:
Maybe less, right? Isn't like 900 or something?
Guilherme:
Maybe less. Yeah.
Tony Kaizen:
Something ridiculous like that. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Yeah. So if you want to buy iPhone, it's... Have to work years.
Tony Kaizen:
Literally, man. Literally had to work years for that shit. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Yeah, yeah. So, and this is, like I said, it's a good place.
It's a good country, but shit like that. People just go off. Fuck.
Bye Bye. I'm just moving to Portugal, U.S, Canada, Europe, or something.
Somewhere, aliás (<-- this is a Portuguese word).
Tony Kaizen:
But is it, was that your main motivation for learning English in the first place,
Or your whole motivation was just trying to understand the movies
And songs you had been listening to since you were a kid?
Guilherme:
Basically, like I said, I'm a video marketing editor.
Tony Kaizen:
Yes.
Guilherme:
So and I work from home I can work for anyone, from anywhere because of English.
It's I can't work from Brazil. But $5... R$5 is $1, right?
And I am searching, I'm searching and the price of the videos is $100, for example. I, eu cobro...
Tony Kaizen:
I charge.
Guilherme:
I charge R$100 for a video.
Tony Kaizen:
Oh, Jesus.
Guilherme:
If I charge $100, I will earn R$500 for the same job. The same job.
So it's for basically, it's to understand movies, understand raps and work from the world.
All the world, all the world are my customers.
Tony Kaizen:
When you say 'work the world' you mean work with the world in terms of doing business and things like that?
Guilherme:
Yeah. Is something like. Oh, do you need a video? I make videos.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. Yeah. So work with the world. Exactly.
Not just with Brazilians, but people all over the world, right?
Guilherme:
Yep. Yeah.
Tony Kaizen:
And from anywhere in the world. Because like you said, you can do your job in any country.
You just need your computer and the internet.
Guilherme:
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Basically, this is it.
I need a computer, internet and that's it. I can make my job. So...
Tony Kaizen:
I can do my job.
Guilherme:
I can do. I can do my job. I can do my job. So... I think that's my main goal.
Tony Kaizen:
I gotcha.
Guilherme:
Just work from anyone. All over the world.
Tony Kaizen:
It's a good way to think about it, man.
Guilherme:
Yeah and make more money.
Tony Kaizen:
Absolutely. That's always good. So, that's always good. But like you said, man,
Something so simple as learning another language like English opens so many doors that you never thought possible
Cause you can, like you said, do the same job just with different clients that can and will pay you more for the same job. You know?
Guilherme:
Yeah. Yeah. I have a friend, she's a motion designer.
I don't know if English is the same word. Motion designer?
Tony Kaizen:
Like motion graphics and stuff like that.
Guilherme:
Yeah, exactly. And she's, she's, she's have my... I don't know if it's right,
But my level, my English level. Okay? And she understand a lot, but she's not speak.
And she... how to say that? She paid for a teacher for speaking, talking, something like we are no know now.
Tony Kaizen:
Sure.
Guilherme:
And now she's only work from people outside from Brazil. Out of Brazil.
I don't know how to...
Tony Kaizen:
Outside of Brazil.
Guilherme:
Outside of Brazil. And she's making, she's earning a lot of money.
Not a lot of money, but more money because how I said, the same job for another or other,
Another country is paying more for us because I...
So when I, when she told me that, I think, Okay, that's what I need.
And I just, I started, I think this is the word, I started of searching about teachers,
English teachers, and I found your TikTok. I said, Okay,
He's explain, I understand what he's saying and he... how do I say?
He speaks, he speaks in the way... de uma forma que eu gosto. In the way of I like.
Tony Kaizen:
In a way I like. Yeah.
Guilherme:
In a way I like. So.. And he's a black man too. It's very important.
So I say, okay, okay, I like. And I follow you on TikTok. And like I said yesterday, I...
You said about Life in English, and I just joined the community.
Tony Kaizen:
Wow, man, that's awesome. It's such a great story to go from knowing absolutely nothing.
Then just over a year, a year and a half by yourself,
Just by being interested and doing it every day, by watching movies,
Listening to music, reading things, writing, etc.
And then now you've got to this point where you're speaking.
And you did it all basically by yourself, man. That was crazy. It's really impressive.
But my question to you is, why did you not do the same thing your friend did?
Because you said she found a private teacher to practice with on a regular basis.
So what made it or how can I say,
Why was the idea of joining a community more interesting than the idea of just finding a private teacher?
Guilherme:
How to answer that.. The idea of community is so nice to me.
A bunch of people. A lot of people, I don't know. A bunch of people is right?
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah, sure. Same thing.
Guilherme:
A bunch of people and speaking, talking. And this is where... It's nice, you know?
And okay, I could just talk to her. She knows English. And more or less it's mais ou menos.
More or less. It's... And I could just speak with her. But commu... Community is so hard.
Community. Community is, it's nice. It's... don't know how to say that.
I... we are social animals. I don't know it's English is the same.
Tony Kaizen:
Yep. Same thing. Same thing.
Guilherme:
Same thing? We are social animals.
So and I like the people in the same place talking about the same thing.
Like a church, I don't know. A lot of people in the same place talking about the same thing.
And I think is you learn more that way. I don't know.
It's for me is, it's more the English environment. Environment. I think that's the word.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah.
Guilherme:
The English environment. Em inglês é, o ambiente do Inglês in Portuguese,
But in English I think is the English environment. And it's more time in English.
It's.. And more time in English, more people in English and people, I don't know, you are in U.S.
You.. All the world and look at U.S, United States.
So you have... how to say 'alunos' in Port... in English? I don't know.
Tony Kaizen:
Students. Students.
Guilherme:
Students. Student. Estudantes. Okay. Students all over the world.
You could have students all over the world and I like that. I like it.
I don't know if it's possible to talk about people from England or England,
No... English (people).. To speak English. But like, I don't know.
China and Russia. Every. Venezuela. Colombia. I don't know.
I like this kind of feeling. I think that's the word.
Type of feeling and to speak people all over the world.
Differents, I don't know, lifes experience. Experience of lifes.
Tony Kaizen:
Different life experiences.
Guilherme:
Different life experiences. Thank you. This is perfect to me.
Or perfect for me. I don't know how to say.
Tony Kaizen:
You know what's funny, man, is I was just thinking to myself, which one sounds better?
And I would say, This is perfect... Both of them make sense in this case.
But naturally, I would say "for me". This is perfect for me.
Guilherme:
Perfect for... It's perfect, it's... Words you have C and T.
You, you don't say T. Just perfect.
Tony Kaizen:
Perfect. I say the T. It's just very, very, very soft. And you don't...
To be honest with you, you don't have to pronounce that T
Because many people don't when they're speaking fast, but just naturally perfect.
There's a soft T at the end there.
Guilherme:
Perfect.
Tony Kaizen:
There you go. That was perfect.
Guilherme:
Okay. This different of fact. Fact, fact have a T. But you don't say T. Right?
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. That's a fact. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Fact. Okay. Okay. This is... It's like the word, and I don't,
I don't know if you know the Hamilton as Lin-Manuel Miranda. You know?
Tony Kaizen:
No. It's a person?
Guilherme:
Oh, no? No, Hamilton is a Broadway show. It's amazing, man. Okay. I will send a link of Hamilton.
Tony Kaizen:
Hey, please do. Please do. You sound very passionate about this.
Guilherme:
Oh, it's amazing. You like rap, right?
Tony Kaizen:
I love rap. Hell yeah.
Guilherme:
Okay. It's like a rap concert about the life of Alexander Hamilton, the founding father.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Guilherme:
It's amazing. I send you a link.
Tony Kaizen:
Please do.
Guilherme:
It's amazing. So in Hamilton, they said the word "debt". D E B T.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah.
Guilherme:
And for a long time, I thought this debt. And so, no, it's not. It's debt.
Debt like debt, fact. So okay they know they don't pronounce some letters and that's it.
So fact, debt and perfect, that's words and consonants I think that's the part the word.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah.
Guilherme:
Consonants and C, T is each one is pronounced.. it's pronouncing in one way.
De uma forma. This is a different way. I don't know if it's right.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. In a particular way, you can say.
Guilherme:
In a particular way. It's.. Yeah, okay. In a particular way.
So it's hard for me, for Brazilian people. If you have... here's example.
Here's an example. Found. O U N. FOUND. But country is O U N, but it's not country. Okay?
So in Portuguese, if you (have) O U N in any word it's OU. Any word.
O U O. Like 'louco' and crazy. And so that's the difficult part of English for me.
Tony Kaizen:
And you want to know what is crazy, man,
Is just with that specific example O U N in 'found' it's an OUN.
The O U N in 'country' is AN, country. And that's C O U N T R Y.
Now, I'm going to give you another word,
And I want you to tell me how you think you would pronounce this word. COUNTY.
Guilherme:
Repeat, please.
Tony Kaizen:
C O U N T Y.
Guilherme:
It's dounty?
Tony Kaizen:
No, C. C O U N T Y. Just like 'country' but with no R. Take the R out of 'country'.
Guilherme:
Ahh. I don't know... I know this word, it's county.
Tony Kaizen:
County.
Guilherme:
I know this word. It's in Portuguese, it's like Condado. It's county.
Tony Kaizen:
Exactly, exactly. But the point is, you just take the R out of country
And the word makes a completely different sound, man. It makes no sense. It makes no sense.
Guilherme:
Yeah, yeah. County. Country. Found.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah.
Guilherme:
It's, it's just drop the R and in different pronounce.
Tony Kaizen:
It's OUN instead of AN. Yeah, it's weird. It's weird.
Guilherme:
Why? Why?
Tony Kaizen:
This is fucking English, man. Yeah, it's, there's like a whole history behind it, of course.
But this... which you have to come to accept at some point during the process of learning English is just like,
Some things don't make sense, man, and you just have to accept.
That's just the way it is. Don't even ask questions. Just that's the way it is, you know?
Guilherme:
So but here's a question. If you native speakers in the United States see the word, you know how to pronounce? Or...
Tony Kaizen:
Yes. Well, those specific words. Those specific like, county and country, we just know that one is pronounced...
Guilherme:
I say a new word. A word you never saw. A new word.
Tony Kaizen:
A word I've never seen before.
Guilherme:
You look and... Yeah, you look and just know how to pronounce or somethings some people pronounce the wrong way?
Tony Kaizen:
No, it depends on the word. But yeah, it's a normal thing,
A common thing for us to see a new word and have no idea how to pronounce it. That's normal.
Guilherme:
Okay.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah.
Guilherme:
Okay.
Tony Kaizen:
That's totally normal. Or like, we hear a word and we have no idea how to spell it, you know?
It's totally normal. Because you can spell it multiple ways in English.
Guilherme:
It's like throughout. It's like, okay. The first time I listened 'throughout' I...
How to spell? And when I, when I saw the word written. Written, I think there's the word.
Tony Kaizen:
Written, yeah.
Guilherme:
Written. I said okay, that's weird. Really weird.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah, man.
Guilherme:
It's weird because throughout it's... I thought, T H R O U T? And no. And it's...
You have the, the seems words. I don't know if it's... palavras parecidas. Seems words, I think.
Tony Kaizen:
Oh, similar words. Similar words.
Guilherme:
Similar words, like throughout, thought, tough and I don't know, through. It's...
Now I see the word I know. But for a long time for me it's the same word.
Through, throughout, tough. Okay. But you, like you said, it's just again and again and again you will learn it.
Tony Kaizen:
That's it, man. That's really it.
So it's actually really cool to hear from somebody that considers themselves a lower intermediate speaker
And has been learning by themselves from the beginning just basically express so clearly from your own experience,
You understand the simple philosophy of if you want to learn the language,
Just live your life in that language every single day.
It's there's nothing else you need to do. You know?
Of course, some people will learn in different ways.
Some people prefer to read or write more or whatever.
But if you want to learn how to speak or have conversations,
You just have to speak and have conversations, man.
So I'm very impressed and even proud of you, man.
And like the progress that you've made, like by yourself, just...
Guilherme:
Thank you!
Tony Kaizen:
Learning at home alone. It's cool, man.
Because I went through the same exact process when I learned your first language, you know?
So it's cool to see somebody else doing it themselves, you know?
Guilherme:
You... Okay, you speak Portuguese, but I don't know how to say that. I considering me?
In Portuguese, eu me considero. But in English I consider me a lower...
Tony Kaizen:
I consider myself. Myself.
Guilherme:
Okay. The first word is right, second word is wrong. I consider myself a lower intermediate.
And but I don't know how... It's difficult to me because listen, okay, I listen and...
Skills of English. Oh better, English skills.
Listen, I consider myself an upper intermediate because I listen, I understand but I...
Eu coloquei é put. I put, I put a lower intermediate because of speaking, because of writing.
And I think it is more appropriate to me.
Tony Kaizen:
Appropriate.
Guilherme:
Repeat, please. Appropriate.
Tony Kaizen:
Appropriate.
Guilherme:
Tony Kaizen:
There you go. Appropriate. And it's like I know it's spelled A T E, so you think ATE.
But when we're speaking naturally, it sounds more like IT. Appropriate. You see?
Guilherme:
Appropriate. Apro... That's no ATE. It's IT.
Tony Kaizen:
It's more like IT. Exactly. Exactly.
Guilherme:
Appropriate.
Tony Kaizen:
There you go. Appropriate. Priate. Appropriate.
Guilherme:
It's strange for me. The the is is is when words, cognate words?
Palavras cognatas? I don't know how to say that.
Tony Kaizen:
Cognate words.
Guilherme:
Cognate words is apropriado, appropriate it's difficult to me. But... I forgot what I am saying.
Tony Kaizen:
You were saying that you put a lower level for speaking because it's more appropriate. Right?
Guilherme:
Yeah. Yeah. You are a lower intermediate in Portuguese or upper or advanced level or something like that?
Tony Kaizen:
You're asking me my level?
Guilherme:
Yeah, in Portuguese you're advanced or... I think.
Tony Kaizen:
Well, I consider myself like an upper intermediate speaker and an advanced listener.
Guilherme:
Yeah. Oh, that's you, you and you learn in the same way.
Tony Kaizen:
Literally. I can tell you very quickly all I did to learn your language.
It was very, very, very simple. I started with Duolingo because that was the only app or technology I knew at the time.
And I just wanted to learn a bunch of simple words as fast as possible.
So I would use Duolingo for maybe an hour or an hour and a half.
It was super boring, but I learned a bunch of basic words.
Then immediately in less than a month I went on Hello Talk and I started sending messages to people,
Looking for people to talk to. I found some really cool people, one or two,
And I would talk to them every single day. Every day we would send text messages, voice messages.
We would talk on the phone. We would talk on Skype. But every day.
Sometimes I would talk for three or 4 hours with one of them. You see what I'm saying?
And this was like every day for a year or two years. And then I made some more friends.
I talked to hundreds of Brazilians and I started teaching English.
So I just met a bunch of Brazilians over two or three years,
And I was always talking to people in Portuguese, thinking in Portuguese,
Listening to music in Portuguese. I would watch the classic movies.
But every day I was talking. Every single day.
So that means every day I was having conversations,
Like having to improvise and hear different accents, learn a bunch of new slang.
But in real time, in real life. So I never studied. I hate studying grammar and,
Like, speaking exercises and I'm not going to remember that stuff. It's boring.
We use language to talk to people and I like to talk to people. So that's what I did.
Guilherme:
Yeah. Oh, you listen to music but rap music, brazilian rap music?
Tony Kaizen:
Racionais, MV Bill, Criolo... you know?
A bunch of them. Yeah. Rael. There's a bunch of different artists.
Guilherme:
How do you understand the slang? And the... Because...
Tony Kaizen:
And that's exactly how, man, making Brazilian friends.
So some of my friends love hip-hop music. Brazilian hip hop music.
So they would send me music, they would send me different artists
And I would read the song lyrics and I'd ask them questions or we'd get on Skype
And they would explain line by line what these things mean, what the slang is,
What city they're from, and stuff like that. You see what I'm saying?
So I had real people explaining the real language to me.
Guilherme:
Oh, okay. Explain and it's... It's amazing. See, because I, I don't know how to say in English.
Em Português, in Portuguese you say Português, but in English is Portuguese, like...
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. Portuguese.
Guilherme:
So and... In Portuguese we say "Eu sou viciado em alguma coisa". How to say this in English?
Tony Kaizen:
I would say I'm addicted to something.
Guilherme:
Ohh okay, but it's like... Okay, listen, in Portuguese, you say Eu sou viciado em rap.
You don't say... okay. You don't say "We are addict of rap". Of rap.
Tony Kaizen:
Not addicted of. But you can say I'm addicted to rap music. Makes perfect sense. It's normal.
Guilherme:
Ooh. The same expression.
Tony Kaizen:
I'm addicted to rap. I'm addicted to anime. I'm addicted to scary movies. Whatever you want. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Oh, okay. I was looking for for something in English. This makes sense.
So Eu sou viciado em... This is the same expression. Addicted.
Tony Kaizen:
Addicted to.
Guilherme:
I love it. So.. This is so incredible. And I'm addictive for a rap music.
Tony Kaizen:
Addicted. Addicted to rap music.
Guilherme:
Addicted to. Addicted. Addic... Okay, I just put in Google translator and listen. Addicted.
Tony Kaizen:
Addicted. Addicted.
Guilherme:
Addicted. It's TD a lot of TD TD. Addicted to rap music.
And when I, [inaudible] when I listen to Kendrick, for example.
I don't know if if his voice or something like that is difficult to me understand.
I don't know. Tupac is easier because he speaks clearly.
Clearlyn, clearly. De forma mais clara. I don't know how to say that.
Tony Kaizen:
More clearly.
Guilherme:
More clearly. And Kendrick is... I don't known if it's his voice or something.
I love Kendrick. I love Kendrick. Kendrick is amazing.
But I... when I listen Kendrick, I have no idea what I am saying.
Like then I go to Rap Genius or something like that. I read the le... the lyric, the letter.
Tony Kaizen:
The lyrics. Yeah.
Guilherme:
The lyrics. It's in Portuguese it's all letra. English it's lyrics.
Then, I understand what him saying.
Tony Kaizen:
What he's saying.
Guilherme:
But... what he say... He saying, saying, saying. What he saying.
So I will make the same... I will do the same process you did.
And listen Brazilian rap because if she works too, if it works to me.
Tony Kaizen:
If it works for you, it works for me.
Guilherme:
It's work for you, it's work for me. I know, I think. So thank you.
I thought that that's not work for me. Learn rap music, English rap music.
It's, it's harder. It's not like watch Friends, you know, watch How I Met Your Mother.
It's... I don't know. It's black English. You could use this term?
This Black English in U.S? In Brazil you say a lot 'Black English',
like Atlanta the series of Donald Glover they are saying black English.
It's different like, Friends or How I Met Your Mother. This... how I say this?
Essa distinção, essa diferença nos Estados Unidos.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. That difference in the United States. Yeah. So to answer your first question, we don't...
It's not something that we say on a regular basis, like Black English or something like that.
That term kind of, I think, evolved over time. Some people call it Ebonics,
Some people call it like, African American vernacular English.
There's a bunch of names for it. But it's not something that we really think too much about.
We just kind of talk the way we talk. It's all English to us.
But we do recognize, even if, like, subconsciously, a difference between the two.
Yeah, there's a distinct difference in culture, even though we're all American.
Guilherme:
Oh, okay. It's like Brazil there's a difference in the Portuguese we say in business, for example, and you say in neighborhood.
Tony Kaizen:
Sure. Yeah. Yeah.
Guilherme:
It's two different languages. And this is... For me it's like listening Racionais.
I understand the language. It's what I live. It's, I think for you listen, I don't know,
Tupac or Big or something like that it's the same.
Okay, they say what I'm living or what I'm living or what I, what I live to or something like that.
But they... This language, the expressions, it's it's normal.
It's like day to day or something like that. Day to day? I think it's that, dia a dia.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. Day to day. Sure.
Guilherme:
Day to day. So I want to learn rap English because I love it.
I would like it to understand what Kendrick is saying.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. Of course. Of course. And you mentioned that as well.
I think with Kendrick specifically, one, he rapped so fast, man, so fast.
But then also his voice is typically very low and it's almost as if he's not mumbling,
But it's very difficult to understand if you're not paying close attention,
Whereas somebody like Tupac raps slower and louder. He opens his mouth more when he speaks.
So it's just two completely different ways of speaking in general I think,
That makes it more difficult. But I think anything can work to be honest.
Books can work, movies can work, music can work, anything can work.
It just depends on what you're most interested in because then it becomes fun
And you don't feel like you're studying anymore.
And I also think it depends on what type of language you're trying to learn.
Because obviously you're probably not going to learn the language that you use in a Kendrick album
That you would use in a business meeting or an interview or something like that.
It's two completely different ways of talking.
So you have to know, how do I want to speak?
And then that will help you choose the right study material. You know what I mean?
Guilherme:
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I have to study two different languages, more or less.
This business and street language or something like that. Is I have to study and I will study the words.
If you care, if you're... I have a question about some expression and question you about some expression in English,
In a rap music or something like that. Just to say.. What is Tony.. Is the..
Something, some expression. Oh oh, can I, can I have a... One question, one simple question is I always...
The word, one word, the N word. I'm a black man, okay? But I'm a Brazilian black man.
I'm not American black man. If I go to U.S and say nigger or something like that,
It's the same thing to you say nigger or it's different because I'm foreign?
I don't know if you understand what I mean.
Tony Kaizen:
I understand. I understand. I'm just thinking about my answer.
And I would say that it's different because you're not from here.
But if you said it to somebody and you said it naturally,
I don't think people would have a strange reaction, because you look like a black man.
You see what I'm saying? So if you're just in a casual conversation and it comes out and you say naturally,
most people would think that's normal because you look like somebody who would say something like that.
But if you say it and it's obvious you're not from here, it's like,
Why are you saying that word? You know?
That's probably the reaction that most people would have.
Guilherme:
Okay. If I was a white guy. Never.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah. Most... I mean, I can't say never because everyone says it, bro.
They just say it at certain times around certain people, but everyone says that word.
So I would say if it were that case, it was like some white dude in most cases, it's not going to be good.
Guilherme:
Okay. Because I know you saying this a lot.
Tony Kaizen:
All the time. Yeah.
Guilherme:
All the time. It's not, it's not a bad word. And it's a bad, it's a bad word.
Tony Kaizen:
It is but we just say it anyway.
Guilherme:
It is a bad word. But like for you guys, it's like my homie or something like that. It's okay...
Tony Kaizen:
In some cases, yeah. It depends. But yeah.
Guilherme:
If you, if you have a friend or something like that, it's you have a friend.
Oh okay, it's my homie, it's my nigga or something like that. I don't know if I thro...
If why, if I was think it's wrong, but I think it's like... In Brazil we have the same.
Ok, like equivalent. Nigger is criolo, for example. Criolo is the same, ok?
Bad word, slavery, all this kind of shit. But Criolo, there's a artist with this name.
Criolo. It's like you if you have an artist and call himself nigger.
Tony Kaizen:
Yeah.
Guilherme:
I could say it's strange. But okay, it's for us it's normal. Criolo or something like that.
So thank you for answering me. And if I go to United States, I never say that word. Because...
Tony Kaizen:
I think it's the better choice. Yeah. I mean, you can.
I think it's better to just avoid it.
Guilherme:
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. He beat him up to me. I know he beat me and I don't. So...
Tony Kaizen:
They will beat me up. Yeah. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Beat me up. Yes. So no. Thanks for explain.
Tony Kaizen:
Of course, man.
Guilherme:
But is it.. Any one.. Do have any question or something like that?
Tony Kaizen:
Say that again.
Guilherme:
Do you have any questions for me?
Tony Kaizen:
Oh a bunch. Yeah, of course. A bunch, man.
But actually, I just noticed it's about 4:40,
So I got to get ready to go to work, man. But...
Guilherme:
Uh, no problem.
Tony Kaizen:
What's today? Tuesday. So tomorrow morning, most likely, I'll be back online.
But any time, man, send me a message or music, videos,
Whatever you're working on, man, you got questions about. So...
Guilherme:
Oh, thanks. Thanks. Thanks a lot. Because I have a lot of questions, but I know...
I don't know how to say in English an expression, encher o saco em Portuguese.
Tony Kaizen:
Ahh pelo amor de... Nah, encher o saco would be like "Get on your nerves".
Let me write that for you. I'm gonna send it to you.
Guilherme:
Get in your nerves.
Tony Kaizen:
Get on someone's nerves.
Guilherme:
Get on your nerves. Okay.
Tony Kaizen:
Yes.
Guilherme:
I will not do that.
Tony Kaizen:
No, of course not, man. That's what I'm here for. That's what I'm here for.
Guilherme:
Oh, get on someone's nerves.
Tony Kaizen:
Exaclty. Encher o saco de alguém.
Guilherme:
Oh understand. Get on nerv... Ah encher o saco. Get on nerves.
Tony Kaizen:
Like, Man this girl is getting on my nerves or that noise is getting on my nerves, or something like that.
Guilherme:
Ah okay, I don't do that. Okay?
Tony Kaizen:
It's all good. It's all good.
Guilherme:
Stay cool. And that's it, I think. And it's not, I'm don't, I'm not... Not don't.
Wait, I'm not too nervous anymore. I'm don't nervous anymore. How do you say?
Tony Kaizen:
I'm not nervous anymore.
Guilherme:
I'm not nervous. Not and don't is... It's hard. Not. Don't. I'm not nervous anymore.
You're incredible, man. You're amazing. I love talk to you.
Tony Kaizen:
Thank you, man. I appreciate that. I really enjoyed the conversation
And I'm sure we'll have many more, man. Rap is one of my favorite subjects,
So we'll always have something to talk about. That's for sure.
Guilherme:
Ohh. Yeah. So you're home.
Tony Kaizen:
Exactly. We're at home, man. That's it.
Guilherme:
So that's it. I have to go now. Because I'm have dinner tonight.
Make dinner. To make dinner is sense, right? I have to make dinner.
Tony Kaizen:
Are you going to cook dinner yourself?
Guilherme:
Yeah. Cook dinner.
Tony Kaizen:
Then yeah, you will make dinner. Yeah.
Guilherme:
Make dinner. Yeah. And if I... vou jantar. Fazer a janta é cook dinner.
Eu vou jantar é, it's make dinner?
Tony Kaizen:
Nah, fazer a janta e cozinhar you can say 'make dinner' or 'cook dinner'. Same thing.
But jantar, o verbo would be 'to eat dinner' or 'have dinner', you know?
Guilherme:
Oh okay. So have dinner it's eating.
Tony Kaizen:
Jantar. Yeah, exactly. If I'm having dinner, I'm eating dinner. Same thing.
Guilherme:
Okay. It's cozinhar it's cook or make dinner. That's the difference.
Tony Kaizen:
Exactly. Exaclty.
Guilherme:
Perfect. Thank you.
Tony Kaizen:
Of course, man.
Guilherme:
Okay.
Tony Kaizen:
Enjoy your dinner, my friend. I'm actually gonna get some lunch
And then head off to work myself. So we'll talk soon, my friend.
Guilherme:
Okay. See ya. Bye-bye.
Tony Kaizen:
All right. See you, man. Take care.
All right, y'all. That's it for this episode.
So hopefully you enjoyed the conversation between Guilherme and me, a.
Nd hopefully, now it's even more clear that you really can learn any language, but in this case,
English from the comfort of your home spending relatively little money or none whatsoever.
I think it's more of a question of how interested you are in the language,
How much time and effort you dedicate to learning this language on a consistent basis,
And also how often you're speaking to and listening to real people.
So if that's something that you are interested in, you know, speaking to real people,
Learning English, and making friends with real people from around the world, including myself,
You can visit lifeinenglish.net/VIP to learn more about how you can join the Life in English community.
It really is a great place to learn the English language,
But also just make some friends and have a good time while you do it. You know what I'm saying?
But that's it for this episode. Like I said, hopefully you enjoyed it, man.
This is Life in English. I'm your host, Tony Kaizen.
And I'll talk to you soon.
Peace!